# Utility Methods

The library provides a number of useful utility methods embodied in a single static [VDS.RDF.Tools](xref:VDS.RDF.Tools) class which is part of the [VDS.RDF](xref:VDS.RDF) namespace. Anywhere you reference `VDS.RDF` you'll be able to use the static methods described in this article.

## IsValidBaseUri

The [IsValidBaseUri(Uri baseUri)](xref:VDS.RDF.Tools.IsValidBaseUri(System.Uri)) method is used to determine whether a URI is valid to be used as a Base URI for resolving relative URIs against. In practise this means that the URI must be absolute and not using the mailto scheme.

Note that this method is only used when it is necessary to resolve a relative URI against a Base URI. It is perfectly acceptable to have a Base URI against which you cannot resolve relative URIs providing no relative URIs are used.

## ResolveQName

The [ResolveQName(String qname, INamespaceMapper nsmap, Uri baseUri)](xref:VDS.RDF.Tools.ResolveQName(System.String,VDS.RDF.INamespaceMapper,System.Uri)) function is used to resolve a prefixed name to a URI in the context of the given [VDS.RDF.INamespaceMapper](xref:VDS.RDF.INamespaceMapper) and Base URI. This is primarily used internally in some of the Parsers and in [IUriNode](xref:VDS.RDF.IUriNode) creation.

## ResolveUri

The [ResolveUri(String uriref, String baseUri, IUriFactory factory = null)](xref:VDS.RDF.Tools.ResolveUri(System.String,System.String,VDS.RDF.IUriFactory)) method is used to resolve a URI Reference (a relative/absolute URI or a fragment identifier) against a a given Base URI.
It is used internally by most of the Parsers.
The `IUriFactory` argument is optional. Omitting it or passing null will use the URI factory instance for creating the returned URI.

## ResolveUriOrQName

The [ResolveUriOrQName(IToken t, INamespaceMapper nsmap, Uri baseUri)](xref:VDS.RDF.Tools.ResolveUriOrQName(VDS.RDF.Parsing.Tokens.IToken,VDS.RDF.INamespaceMapper,System.Uri)) method is used to resolve a [UriToken](xref:VDS.RDF.Parsing.Tokens.UriToken) or a [QNameToken](xref:VDS.RDF.Parsing.Tokens.QNameToken) into a URI in the context of the given [INamespaceMapper](xref:VDS.RDF.INamespaceMapper) and Base URI. Again this method is used internally in some of the Parsers.

## StripUriFragment

The [StripUriFragment(Uri uri, IUriFactory factory = null)](xref:VDS.RDF.Tools.StripUriFragment(System.Uri,VDS.RDF.IUriFactory)) is used to return a new URI generated by removing the fragment part from the input URI. 
The `IUriFactory` argument is optional. Omitting it or passing null will use the URI factory instance for creating the returned URI.
